---
layout: post
title: My Single Favorite Book
category: news
---

## Introduction (2 min read)

The first time I read Herman Melville’s *Moby-Dick*, I was on a 32-foot
gillnetter in Bristol Bay, Alaska. It was my second summer fishing for
salmon, and the run was so dismal that the Department of Fish and Game
wouldn’t let us put our nets in the water. On a boat with the living
space of a large car, shared between three people, there’s not a whole
lot to do but to pick a place and read when there’s no work to be done.
And so that’s what I did. I found a friend in the narrator, Ishmael, and
solace in his account of a far more treacherous fishery. I might have
been a little bored, and probably had not stepped on land for a few
weeks, but Ishmael’s three-year voyage quickly quieted my complaints. I
liked his cutting wit, and even dog-eared a few of his homilies.
Probably in the middle of one of these very monologues, about halfway
through the book, it finally occurred to me to wonder, *why is this guy
whaling?* I don’t remember exactly what prompted this sudden question,
but I do remember flipping back to the beginning and re-reading the
first paragraph of the novel. In vague terms right after our narrator’s
acclaimed introduction of “Call me Ishmael”, we learn a little about his
resolution to make his way to the sea. I’m sure that I reread the
passage and, satisfied with his reasoning, continued on my way to the
bigger-and-better in the book.

Ishmael’s story is quietly lost to the reader who pursues a more
seemingly sophisticated inquiry. The chapter in which he introduces
himself, “Loomings”, even by its name signifies that it is unimportant
in comparison to what will come, and it reads as if it were a mere
necessity in order to move on and begin the epic the rest of the text
will provide. But Ishmael himself, and especially his decision to whale,
is worth an inquiry of its own. At first breath of the novel, he has
just made a tremendous decision to leave Manhattan for a Nantucket
whaler. Ishmael is discontent with his life in the city, and is
wrestling with a question that is so basic it is easy to overlook—how
does one make life worth living? He thinks of the sea, and consigns
himself to one of the most treacherous and grueling jobs imaginable; but
this seems like a miserable plan for a man who is miserable. Why does
Ishmael whale?

## Loomings

In the first chapter of the book, “Loomings”, Ishmael famously presents
the state of mind that leads him to his decision.

> Some years ago—never mind how long precisely—having little or no money
> in my purse, and nothing particular to interest me on shore, I thought
> I would sail about a little and see the watery part of the world. It
> is a way I have of driving off the spleen and regulating the
> circulation. Whenever I find myself growing grim about the mouth;
> whenever it is a damp, drizzly November in my soul; whenever I find
> myself involuntarily pausing before coffin warehouses, and bringing up
> the rear of every funeral I meet; and especially whenever my hypos get
> such an upper hand of me, that it requires a strong moral principle to
> prevent me from deliberately stepping into the street, and
> methodically knocking people's hats off—then, I account it high time
> to get to sea as soon as I can. This is my substitute for pistol and
> ball.[^1]

We don't learn what Ishmael was doing on shore immediately before
shipping, other than that he had "nothing particular to interest" him.
We don't learn who his family is, or about his circle of friends. He
doesn't sound like a vagabond but he has the aimlessness that might be
associated with one. He is tether-less. If we take him at his word
despite his humorous tone—and we should, the novel is so troublesome and
mysterious that it demands to be taken seriously—then he spends his time
walking around the city: walking past coffin warehouses, walking past
funeral processions, and walking past people, resisting the urge to
knock their hats off. He is living a dark and almost apathetic life.

Presumably, the rest of “Loomings” is intended to explain how whaling
addresses his ‘hypos’. In theory, it is a chapter-long description of
why he takes to the sea. He gives a defense for his choice of shipping
as deckhand, and a brief explanation for why this trip is aboard a
whaler, and not a merchant vessel as he has done in the past. All the
answers he provides, though, are a little unsatisfying. Apparently to
justify his going as a sailor, for example, he offers that he will be
paid for his troubles, whereas a passenger himself must pay—“the act of
paying is perhaps the most uncomfortable infliction that the two orchard
thieves entailed up on us. But *being paid,—*what will compare with
it?”[^2] This seems a worthwhile reason at first. We know Ishmael has
little in his purse, so he probably could not afford a passenger’s berth
anyway, but why this note about being paid? When he later decides to
sign on with the *Pequod* in Nantucket, he discloses that he hopes only
to finish his voyage without debt.[^3] If he finds paying so
uncomfortable, and being paid so pleasurable, whaling is certainly not
the right industry for him—and he knows that. While perhaps a little
romantic, he is not ignorant.

Another comment in the same paragraph would clearly not hold up in court
either. He’s not doing it—he says—for the glory of the work. “For my
part, I abominate all honorable respectable toils, trials and
tribulations of every kind whatsoever”[^4]. That he might actually think
this about himself is laughable; Ishmael becomes the chief communicator
for the honor and glory of whaling. Whole chapters of the novel are
dedicated to the scientifically-precise account of the history and honor
of whaling[^5], and whole others are given to careful account of just
how treacherous the work of whalers is[^6]. He knows he is taking a job
of much pain and little financial reward. As an indication of how
strange it is that one would become a whaler without sheer necessity,
even one of the *Pequod’s* owners, Peleg, comments that it looks a
“little suspicious” that Ishmael would leave the merchant service for a
whaleship, and somewhat facetiously wonders if Ishmael robbed his last
captain.

Ishmael’s next argument in defense of the deckhand has the same mocking
humor in it, citing something about the purer air of the forecastle, and
the prevalence of headwinds in life—this will be returned to. He moves
from this to the most sarcastic section of the chapter, in which he
comments on “those stage managers, the Fates”[^7], and their decision to
cast him in a role upon a whaler instead of a merchant vessel. If we
thought Ishmael believed in Providence, this reasoning might make sense:
he is fated to go to sea on a whaler, and so he does. His mocking tone
makes it difficult to be convinced, though, that any of the statement is
convincing to him. It reads as though he is teasing the people who might
believe that fate would actually dream up “performances” in the program
of life as if they were the acts of a play or the announcements of
newspaper headlines[^8]. The thought that he arrives on a whaler by fate
also seems incompatible with his claimed thoughtfulness in the plan. He
may not have a good reason to go whaling, but his decision is certainly
premeditated. The first two sentences mention the sea as a proven
treatment for his condition of hypos, one that he makes use of
regularly. And then there’s Nantucket—no other place will do. One often
speaks of fate in chance events, but Ishmael has not left anything to
chance in his choice to go whaling. He closes the chapter shortly after
his sketch on fate, and never returns to the question of why he decides
to go whaling. Thus, he manages to say much about his decision to whale
but gives few answers.

There are two exceptions to his empty reasoning. The first is a claim
that there is some ineffable attraction to the sea in the heart of man.
“Meditation and water are wedded for ever,”[^9] he says. To support this
assertion, he describes the collective awe that people have near water.
As he tells it, Manhattan seems to unite on the wharves of the city. The
sea is held holy by Greek and Persian religion, and for the same, mystic
reasons, is still silently holy to each and everyone today. But even in
this account, he can’t refrain from a little silliness. The quotation
above about meditation and water sounds wise and poetic when withdrawn
from context. But in Ishmael’s account, this is just part of a joke:

> Let the most absent-minded of men be plunged in his deepest
> reveries—stand that man on his legs, set his feet a-going, and he will
> infallibly lead you to water, if water there be in all that region.
> Should you ever be athirst in the great American desert, try this
> experiment, if your caravan happen to be supplied with a metaphysical
> professor. Yes, as every one knows, meditation and water are wedded
> for ever.[^10]

He brushes up against what might be the real appeal of the sea, but
checks himself at the very moment he might offer something substantial.
The same is true in the first paragraph of the novel: he starts to
describe the morose reasons he has for leaving Manhattan, but quickly
draws back just as it might become a little dark. When I read that first
paragraph he somehow manages to make me smile—to smile as he talks about
his substitute for pistol and ball. He flirts with significant, sober
reflections, but never becomes tedious or overbearing. This tendency of
Ishmael’s is part of what makes him such an enjoyable narrator, but it
is also frustrating at times—he hides the true answer as he pretends to
disclose it.

Perhaps the best indication of this is in the discussion of headwinds
that I briefly mentioned above. He explains that the common sailor lives
in the unadulterated air of the bow, “For as in this world, head winds
are far more prevalent than winds from astern (that is, if you never
violate the Pythagorean maxim)…”[^11] I spent some time combing over
sailing theory in search for a reference to Pythagoras, or the use of
Euclid’s proposition I.47, and found nothing. Searches for Pythagorean
maxims with reference to the wind, too, came up dry, with one exception.
Deep into Plutarch’s *Symposiacs*, there is a small section entitled
“Why the Pythagoreans Command Fish Not to Be Eaten”, in which it is
described that Pythagoras adopted an Egyptian maxim to never eat
beans[^12]. Ishmael, at my best guess, is making a fart joke. But it is
an abstruse one—and not just that, it is almost impossible to know that
a joke is being made in the first place, since it is wrapped up to
appear as if it were a sage reflection on life. To make base humor
esoteric seems as though he is playing a joke on the reader. He baits us
with irony and humor that masquerades as an explanation for why he
whales. I do not think that this should cause us to stop searching for
an explanation, though. It’s said that there is a grain of truth in
every joke, and Ishmael’s jokes seem especially close to the truth. What
is the truthful answer to why he whales that he’s hiding from us, or
even from himself?

It is possible, of course, that Ishmael does not know precisely what
draws him to whaling. This is the second exception to his thin
reasoning. In some passages he appeals to this idea; he makes himself
sound as though he were a wanderer that is led by a boyish curiosity to
the whale-fishery. This is more convincing to me than his
pseudo-philosophic reasons: it is an adventure unlike any other. The
bulk and portent of the leviathan rouses his interests, and he wants to
be near it. The dreamt-up adjectives entice him, as they tend to do from
afar, and he longs for “forbidden seas” and “barbarous coasts”. And then
there’s the declaration, *I, I am a Nantucket whaler!*—the greatest
badge of all. New Bedford does not satisfy his fancy. It does not have
the romance, the history, the myth. Before page one of the novel, but
after the title page and inscription, there is the section “Extracts”:
twelve pages of quotations featuring the leviathan that vary from
Genesis to Pliny to Shakespeare to Folk Songs. They convey together what
Edmund Burke puts nicely in a reference to the Nantucket fishery in
parliament: “And pray sir, what in the world is equal to it?”[^13] A
whole book could be made of exclamations like these about the whale and
about Nantucket, and Ishmael wants to associate himself with those
exclamations. Who doesn’t want to have an exclamatory life? Ishmael
wishes to make himself a part of this storied greatness, a vague
greatness that is not present among the feeble, liquid-lusting
Manhattoes.

There is something curious about this answer though—or absence
thereof—to why Ishmael goes fishing. By the time he recounts *Moby-Dick*
to us, he has gone whaling multiple times[^14]. That means that more
than once, this boyish curiosity would have led him back to Nantucket
for another voyage without him tasking to understand what exactly is
kindling it. And if it were sheer curiosity and bragging rights, one
would think that one voyage would be enough. For a man who is so
inquisitive, and so quick to delve into analysis of most any topic, it
is a bit strange that he does not have better explanation for why he
desires to whale. He could be withholding his true reasons, but it is
also possible he really doesn’t know why he whales. What is it that he
experiences aboard the *Pequod*? Why does Ishmael whale?

## The First Lowering

In the first whale-chase, we already see the way in which Ishmael’s
‘hypos’ has been affected by his new vocation. A quick-coming squall
tosses the men out of their whaleboat. They scramble back to their
positions and sit knee-deep in water in the swamped skiff, only to
realize they have lost sight of the other boats. They cannot hail them
in the roar of the wind nor bail out their own boat in the pounding
swells. With clothes soaked through with seawater and nothing to do but
wait, they are adrift in the pall of night on the open ocean with all
the power of a twig. The situation should inspire far more despondency
in Ishmael than any normal day in New York City—but it doesn’t.

They hold a candle as a beacon against the black night. Ishmael
describes his newly-made friend Queequeg’s position in the front of the
boat, “There, then, he sat, holding up that imbecile candle in the heart
of that almighty forlornness. There, then, he sat, the sign of a man
without faith, hopelessly holding up hope in the midst of despair”[^15].
The other men are important for companionship, but they also give him a
way to see externally what he struggles with internally. Ishmael is able
to observe and learn from the tendencies of the people around him, and
draw conclusions that can be applied to himself—even though he might not
have been able to work through the same stumble in himself. This means
that while Ishmael clearly recognizes the arduousness of the situation,
he doesn’t have to locate it internally. He isn’t personally dejected in
the way we might expect him to be. He doesn’t lament. This is a crucial
difference. In “Loomings”, Ishmael talks about himself: “It is a way *I
have* of driving off the spleen and regulating the circulation.”[^16]
Here, Ishmael and the others rock in the swells of the “almighty
forlornness”, but they still hold up a light, they still hope. Whereas
before he seemed to be a center of spite in a city of movers, here he is
a part of resilience in an ocean of doom.

When they finally rejoin with the *Pequod*, dawn is coming. By that
time, the lantern is empty, lying crushed at the bottom of the boat, and
they have begun to despair “of ship or boat”. But he still has Queequeg
nearby, cupping his hand to his ear to listen for sounds of the ship. He
has a friend to find hope in, no matter how faint it is. Unlike on land,
Ishmael’s despair is a first-person plural one. He is a part of a “we”
that shivers together. At best, the others give him a reason to stand on
his feet and search the horizon when he wants to curl into his knees,
and at worst, they afford a pride in despair, as though they help him
assert, *I am a whaler, and so goes our courageous and despondent life.*
There is all the difference in this “we”.

Safe again on the ship, he inquires about the frequency of such a
calamity. Queequeg, Stubb, and Flask respond in turn—yes, this sort of
thing happens often; yes, one always lowers, no matter the weather; yes,
one is always expected to break his back as he pulls towards the
Leviathan’s forehead. There is a certain pride a fisherman takes in such
an answer, and Ishmael can now take part in that pride. Stubb, for
example, is quick to offer his anecdote, “I’ve lowered for whales from a
leaking ship in a gale of Cape Horn”[^17]. The responses give a way to
say, *this is who we are.* This defined *we* stands in strong contrast
to the lonesome *I* of “Loomings”. In that chapter, Ishmael is alone,
and hardly seems aware of who he is. He has nothing to introduce himself
by—the time is indefinite, his wealth is indefinite, even his name is
indefinite. In whaling though, he quickly adopts a way to identify
himself as a part of the culture. Those around him boast and chuckle
amidst the absurd adversity of their occupation, and as he reflects on
the experience, he does the same.

> *There are certain queer times and occasions in this strange mixed
> affair we call life when a man takes this whole universe for a vast
> practical joke, though the wit thereof he but dimly discerns, and more
> than suspects that the joke is at nobody's expense but his own.
> However, nothing dispirits, and nothing seems worth while
> disputing.*[^18]

If we were to pick one word to describe Ishmael as he presents himself
in the first chapter, “dispirited” may be best. Yet here, finding
himself as the object of the universe’s practical joke, “nothing
dispirits”. He is learning to become the candle amidst the storm, to
plumb his depths for an “eternal mildness of joy” in the face of the
worst squall. To arrive at this point, though, Ishmael has had to turn
in the wandering freedom he had on land for the ‘slavery’ of the ship.
He must sign himself over to the owners, Bildad and Peleg, to hand his
life’s steering oar to Captain Ahab and the officers, but after this, he
finds himself in a better situation than before. In Hobbes’s
*Leviathan,* man must introduce restraint upon himself in order to join
the commonwealth. Ishmael, too, wants to participate in something far
beyond himself—the *Pequod* and the Nantucket whale-fishery. To do so,
he must necessarily relinquish some of his own agency. This is counter
to our modern intuitions of freedom; we have the idea that it is better
to be unconstrained, and to have the agency to do as one pleases.
Ishmael, though, finds meaning in making himself subordinate. In fact,
in all the book we see Ishmael steer only once, and in that instance, he
nearly capsizes the ship.

Underlying this subordination is also the responsibility of belonging
and having others belong to him. If Ishmael were merely a pawn, his
pleasures might not last long. But in boarding the *Pequod*, and giving
up some of his freedom, he also opens himself to relations with others.
He has a duty to carry out, and others rely upon him. Though he may be
low-ranking on the ship, his role is not menial. When Queequeg is
cutting into the first whale carcass for example, balancing atop its
slick back just above the surface of the water, it is Ishmael who holds
his safety-line, the monkey-rope. It is Ishmael who helps to give him a
little tug when he starts to slide off to one side, or when his foot
comes a bit too close to the mouth of a feeding shark. And if Ishmael
were to fail, and Queequeg were to stumble into the deep? Or if Queequeg
were to slip, and overpower Ishmael? That same-line with which Ishmael
supports the harpooner would drag him down as well—wedded in life,
wedded in death. Boarding together in New Bedford, and sharing the
journey to Nantucket, Ishmael finds a bosom-friend in Queequeg on shore.
But it is on the ocean that he enters into the bond of mutual
dependency.

## The Grand Armada

The Grand Armada shows a physical counterpart to the bonds Ishmael
experiences aboard the *Pequod*. For most of the book, the *Pequod* is
surrounded by an expansive sea. This is part of what makes the sea so
alluring as an object of unbridled fancy. The ocean would normally be
deep enough to reach far beyond man's eyesight and the light of the sun,
so that life aboard the ship would be as if living atop an opaque, but
infinite floor. Overhead, and all around, the sky would be unbroken.
There would be no trees or hills to shroud one's vision. And at the
horizon, the sky and sea would mix together in a vague blend of greys
and blues, to make it impossible to see where one ends and the other
begins. But in “The Grand Armada”, the ship is darting through the Sunda
Strait between Java and Sumatra. At its most narrow, the strait is only
fifteen miles across, and the island of Sangiang further breaks that
distance into two berths of about 8 miles across each[^19]. At its
shallowest, it is only sixty-five feet. Furthermore, the strait is
entered from the west, but quickly narrows towards the east, so that the
confinement becomes more and more stifling as they go. The ever-roaming
*Pequod* suddenly finds itself bound by geographic fetters, growing
tighter and tighter. The walls and floor of the world are moving in on
them and holding them in place.

As the ship enters the strait, cries are raised for a great semicircle
of sperm whales on the horizon. In every direction ahead, two to three
miles distant, are the spouts of sperm whales. Having traveled over
13,000 miles by this point, it must feel as if they have finally parted
the foliage to peer upon El Dorado, gleaming goldenly in the forest sun.
Beyond just wealth, they also witness a natural wonderment. The great
leviathan, which hitherto seems a solitary creature, is seen in a
community of hundreds.

As the men begin their chase, they realize that they too are
chased—Malay pirates are in pursuit. The pirates are unable to catch up
and quickly amount to nothing in the plot, but they do heighten the
claustrophobia of the situation. The *Pequod* now has whales in front,
pirates behind, land on both sides, and the ocean floor approaching ever
faster beneath them. They are hemmed in from every direction but above.
Where there once was nothing on all sides, there is now something.

The *Pequod* lowers, and pulls hard behind the fleeing "herd". Finally,
having exhausted and confounded some of the whales in fright, Queequeg's
harpoon is made fast. The stricken whale jolts forward, and hauls the
small whaleboat deeper into the multitude. Ishmael comments that though
it “... is almost always more or less anticipated; yet does it present
one of the more perilous vicissitudes of the fishery. For as the swift
monster drags you deeper and deeper in the frantic shoal, you bid adieu
to circumspect life and only exist in a delirious throb.”[^20]

As Ishmael tells it, there is no opportunity to release once the whale
is struck. Even if possible, it is doubtful they would risk the
cowardice of breaking free from the whale, but the scene is made more
poignant by the inexorability of the situation. The moment the whale is
fastened, or rather, the moment they are fastened to the whale, it is
too late to change their minds. Retreat is an impossibility.

By Ishmael's account, the undaunted Queequeg continues to steer
"manfully". But the absurdity of their attempt to navigate while being
towed by a sperm whale only helps show the true lack of control the men
have. Starbuck takes his place in the bow of the boat to "prick" whales
out of the way with his lance, as a maid might shoo cats from a kitchen
with a broom, while an unnamed oarsman asserts himself with yells of
"'Out of the way, Commodore!'"[^21]. With the whale fast by Queequeg's
harpoon, the men no longer have command. They have handed the helm to
the whale, and lose the power for prudence that comes with the steering
oar. They “bid adieu to circumspect life". First confined by the
geography, and now, having lost control of the boat to a whale, the
unfettered agency associated with the ship has quickly vanished.

After all this, though, the boat is finally pulled through the last line
of whales, and finds itself within the deep tranquility of the shoal’s
protected center. Instead of "delirious throb" they find "that enchanted
calm which they say lurks at the heart of every commotion"[^22]. After
losing control, they are driven to a place far more peaceful and far
more tranquil than any they would have attempted to go to on their own.
In here, the stifling sense of the surrounding Sunda strait is
superseded by an overwhelming warmth—a sense of belonging that comes
with tight spaces. Though the men would fain leave their position for
unbounded ocean, the "living wall" that encloses them also enlivens
them. Here, there is a coziness of close quarters that could never be
replicated by the cold continuity of the sea.

Relinquishing control to the whale was assumed to be “perilous” by
Ishmael, and many would agree with his assumption. It feels precarious
to have to “prick” obstacles out of your way when you’d prefer to avoid
them all together. The calm they are deposited in amongst the whales,
though, goes to show how little of the situation they understood; they
were entirely unaware of the safe haven nearby. In fact, they would have
likely preferred to move in the exact opposite direction. When dragged
towards safety, they fear their direction and wish to break away. The
men, against their will, are taken where they need to go. While tethered
to something they would preferred to have tethered to them, their
situation improves. Their predicament looks akin the Strait of Sunda
itself, narrowing and narrowing more, and then at last, bursting open
into the Java Sea. Fortunately unable to turn back as they go further
into the shoal, they are forced upon the safest place of all. [^23]

There are a few reasons they might be mistrustful of handing over the
steering oar. If one postulates that the world is a malicious place, or
that he has mastered the Temple of Apollo at Delphi’s admonition to
“know thyself”, then he should be concerned with not being in control.
In those cases, he would know best how to bring about what is best for
himself. If one, though, does not know exactly what he wants, or how to
achieve what he want, then it may be advantageous to tether himself to
something else[^24]. This is the recognition that makes Ishmael’s
decision to spend three years of his life whaling make sense. He does
not know what to do with himself, so he signs his freedom away in return
for the three hundredth lay of the *Pequod*. The other crew members
undergo a similarly beneficial loss of agency in “The Grand Armada”.
They could not have chosen to visit the haven amongst the whales since
they did not know it existed, but even if they did it is unlikely they
would have made for it—they would have been too focused on harpooning as
many whales as the time allowed.

There is something even more powerful than the calm they witness,
though. The armada of whales has preserved this pacific place for a
reason: it is a nursery for mothers and young calves. In losing control,
they are shown a glimpse of the natural world that they would otherwise
forego. Their conception of the terror and power of the ocean is
challenged by the resounding calmness and care the whales have for their
kin. Normally, their own actions would prevent them from witnessing such
a phenomena; they will always think of whales as violent if they only
witness their responses to the blow of a harpoon. Because they have been
dragged into the center of the shoal, though, disarmed and powerless,
they observe a tranquility and domesticity that otherwise would remain
hidden. In here, young whales nuzzle the gunwales of the whaleboat.
Queequeg affectionately pats their heads, Starbuck scratches their backs
with his lance. Even more moving are calves still attached to their
mothers by the umbilical cord. Upon this sight, Queequeg yells out,
upset.

> "'Line! line!' cried Queequeg, looking over the gunwale; 'him fast!
> him fast!—Who line him! Who struck?—Two whale; one big, one
> little!'[^25]

It's unclear whether or not Queequeg yells these words because he thinks
someone has violated the tranquility of the shoal's center, or because
he simply does not have the language to express any other sort of line
than the one from a harpoon. Either way, the harpooner does not commonly
see the tether as a symbol of nurture or protection. It is an item for
killing and dominance. This umbilical line is a natural reflection of
the manila line that brought the whalemen to their present spot, in the
heart of the herd. The umbilical cord, though, is a vital line, not a
deathly one. It is a line that nourishes. It seemingly brings sustenance
out of nothing—no killing necessary. By means of the umbilical cord, a
mother nurtures her calf out of herself; it is an intense physical
manifestation of the union between two beings.

Except for Starbuck, family life is not esteemed by the men aboard the
*Pequod*, and it often looks that every man must fend for himself.
Though never made explicit, the desire for tranquility would seem
cowardly in the context of the voyage. That two creatures could have
such a relation, and that the other whales would harbor these nursing
mothers and newborn calves at the middle of the shoal for safekeeping,
is a great triumph for nurture, domesticity, and community. Ishmael, for
one, is clearly moved by this sight:

> And thus, though surrounded by circle upon circle of consternations
> and affrights, did these inscrutable creatures at the centre freely
> and fearlessly indulge in all peaceful concernments; yes, serenely
> revelled in dalliance and delight. But even so, amid the tornadoed
> Atlantic of my being, do I myself still for ever centrally disport in
> mute calm; and while ponderous planets of unwaning woe revolve round
> me, deep down and deep inland there I still bathe me in eternal
> mildness of joy.[^26]

It is hard to believe that this is same man who spoke in “Loomings”.
Here, Ishmael beholds *fearless peace,* and is so inspired to assert
that he too, has a fixed center of mild joy amidst the “unwaning woe” of
his solar system. In “Loomings”, Ishmael is quite the opposite, held by
a fixed mildness of apathy—everything grey, nothing interesting. While
being towed by the Leviathan, he and his shipmates experience a realm of
life where loving care courageously reigns supreme and malevolence seems
impossible. And even though they will continue to hunt, and carry on
their voyage, this is the sort of experience that lends a richness to
life that seems missing in the too-jolly disposition of some other
characters or ships. Never, though, could they have brought themselves
to such a sight. They need to lose their agency to be shown what they do
not or cannot see by themselves.

I am reminded of the prisoners in the allegory of the cave, who, so sure
of their own wisdom and the enlightened man’s deterioration, will not
leave their life of shadows. They show us that much can be lost if one
is too attached to his own agency. Sometimes, perhaps often, we are not
best at doing what is best for ourselves; we need the Leviathan, or the
man who has seen the light, to turn a deaf ear to our protests and drag
us where we do not want to go. The men in Starbuck’s boat need the whale
to tow them into the shoal so that they can witness “the subtlest
secrets of the sea”—the secrets they would not uncover themselves.

Above I pointed to the change in Ishmael as he transitions from an
untethered life in Manhattan to a tethered one aboard the *Pequod*. But
perhaps the comparison between the tethered life and the untethered one
is a fiction, a false dichotomy. Maybe the choice of Ishmael is not
whether or not to be tethered, but what to tether himself to. In the
Grand Armada, this is apparent by the men’s ‘need’ to spear whales. They
are compelled by their captain, who is in turn compelled by the code of
their profession to kill all that they can. When the whale carries them
to the center of the shoal, it is not encroaching a freedom of the helm
that was otherwise unbounded; their course is already determined by Ahab
and the fishery. Rather, the whale offers a different tether from the
one that they are accustomed to, and this difference offers a new glance
at life.

Ishmael suggests this very notion that all are tethered in his
reflections on the monkey-rope—the rope already discussed that joins him
and Queequeg while the harpooner is cutting into the first whale to be
killed.

> And yet still further pondering—while I jerked him now and then from
> between the whale and ship, which would threaten to jam him-still
> further pondering, I say, I saw that this situation of mine was the
> precise situation of every mortal that breathes; only, in most cases,
> he, one way or other, has this Siamese connexion with a plurality of
> other mortals. If your banker breaks, you snap; if your apothecary by
> mistake sends you poison in your pills, you die. True, you may say
> that, by exceeding caution, you may possibly escape these and the
> multitudinous other evil chances of life. But handle Queequeg's
> monkey-rope heedfully as I would, sometimes he jerked it so, that I
> came very near sliding overboard. Nor could I possibly forget that, do
> what I would, I only had the management of one end of it.

Again, Ishmael displays his typical humor in these remarks, but they are
still significant. A sole man is not self-sufficient, and since he
cannot alone provide for himself, he is necessarily relying on those
around him. This reliance is the same as a tether. The businessman in
Manhattan is fixed to one end of a monkey-rope, just like Ishmael, but
at the other end is a banker instead of a harpooner. In both cases, they
can do their best to keep their feet firmly planted and their balance
strong, but if met with a big enough tug, they will pulled down. The
opening passage of “Loomings” presents Ishmael as an entity unto
himself, wandering alone and entirely independent. But this simply
cannot be. If Ishmael buys food from a grocery store, he is roped to the
clerks, the managers, the landlord, and the producers. Say he rebelled
at this thought, and resolved to forage for himself instead of relying
on this chain of others. Then he is tethered to the seasons and the
areas where food grows wild. He is tethered to a specific diet and time
of day when food can be found. This may sound ridiculous, but it is
meant to illustrate that no man has complete agency. Until someone can
get what he wants by simply willing it to be so, he will always be tied
to something beyond himself. [^27]

Thus, in joining the *Pequod*, Ishmael is not simply making a transition
from no tethers to tethers, he is changing who holds the tethers, and
what sort of tethers they are. There are plenty of anecdotes that are
seemingly contrary to Ishmael’s experience, where one gives away freedom
and only gets abuse and unhappiness in return. Ishmael’s experience as a
whaleman is shaped by the specific way in which it requires him to
relinquish some of his agency, not just that he does relinquish agency.
Even in the Grand Armada, we can see how the vignette would change if
Ishmael were fishing with the “pugnacious” and unpoetic third mate,
Flask, for example, instead of Starbuck and Queequeg. The latter two are
able to glean something of the secrets that the shoal divulges, they
take part in the peace and pet and play with the friendly calves. We
could hardly expect Flask to have done the same. Flask might have darted
the defenseless whale as if stepping on an ant, and the spirit of the
scene would have been lost. In that scenario, Ishmael never would have
had the opportunity to behold the bonds of mother and calf, or the
tranquility of the center, and the tour the towing whale takes them on
would have been for naught.

Soon after these secrets, we see another tether that shows just how
wicked the wrong kind of bond can be: druggs—devices intended to fetter
a whale so that he may be returned to and killed later. The drugged
whales become "cramped like malefactors with the chain and ball"[^28].
Such whales invariably "keel up before long", regardless of whether or
not a ship is there to claim them. And even if one is, "oil obtained
from such subjects is of very inferior quality, and by no means of the
nature of attar-of-rose"[^29]. The drugged whales become agonizingly
exhausted, and die slowly—a death that too often goes for naught. They
do not have the chance for a heroic fight, or to be revered by whalemen,
and instead rot into a stenching mass to be mocked and avoided, "worse
than an Assyrian city in the plague"[^30]. Since whalers often cannot
retrieve the prey they’ve drugged, their death often does not even have
the shroud of utility to cover it, but only the greed of attempting to
reap more than what can be harvested.

What makes the drugg most appalling though, is that it is incomplete. It
tethers the whale, without truly tethering-to. The harpoon is a tether
that is used for killing, but it does so fully. At least ideally, the
harpoon links the whale and whaler together until the whale has been
killed. There is no grey area of possession. The drugg, on the contrary,
is an attempt to possess a whale without actually forming any sort of
hitch to possessor. It takes away the autonomy of the whale without
actually mastering him. At the end of the chapter, we see a horrendous
example of a whale caught between fetters and freedom.

One of the whaleboats has tried to maim a whale’s gigantic tail-tendon
so that he can be returned to later. They have thrown a cutting spade at
it, with a rope attached so that they may haul it back. But the wounded
whale’s thrashes rip the line away from the boat, so that the agonizing
whale escapes with spade and dangling line. “By one of the unimaginable
accidents of the fishery”[^31] the whale then becomes entangled in the
harpoon-line, but manages to free the weapon itself. “So that tormented
to madness, he was now churning through the water, violently flailing
with his flexible tail, and tossing the keen spade about him, wounding
and murdering his own comrades.”[^32]

What is so revolting about this "spectacle" is not that the whale is
darted, but that he has *almost* broken free. If he had fully shaken
loose the harpoon, there would be no issue. And if he had been wholly
unsuccessful, then too, there would be nothing beyond the ordinary. But
the horror comes from a state in between, in which the whale is freed
from the lethality of the spade but entangled in the line—allowing him
to flail about as he wishes, but flail the spade as well. The
gruesomeness of this scene, and the perversion of nature witnessed when
a whale becomes a carnivorous creature, goes far beyond mere killing by
the whalers. Being tethered may not always be better than being free,
but anything seems better than being caught in between.

The same is true for Ishmael. Part of what makes whaling such a
meaningful occupation for him is that it is completely absorbing. He
cannot, at the end of the day, go back home to himself. If Ishmael were
working a day-fishery, partially tethered, or constantly fluctuating
between tethers and freedom, the tethers might become exhausting and
tedious. He might come to loath the restraint he feels while working,
and wish he could have more of the meandering time he has after leaving
the boat at the end of the day. In this position, he would never be
forced to become comfortable with his tethers. One might comment that
aboard the whaleship Ishmael would have long periods without work, but
leisure is never the purpose of his labor; and even when he does not
have a specific task, he would have to be ready to work at a moment’s
notice. The whalers live a life of whaling. When Ishmael first describes
New Bedford, it sounds as though he is vacationing in a whale-themed
amusement park. They make a religion of whaling, a dialect of whaling,
an architecture of whaling, and a cuisine of whaling. There is no such
thing as a work-life balance, or six days a week of secularism; their
life and creed is whaling.

## The Sermon

Father Mapple’s sermon shows just how comprehensive the life of the
whaler is. An entire paper could be devoted to the speech, but I’ll just
focus on the last paragraph.

> “But oh! shipmates! on the starboard hand of every woe, there is a
> sure delight; and higher the top of that delight, than the bottom of
> the woe is deep. Is not the main-truck higher than the kelson is low?
> Delight is to him—a far, far upward, and inward delight—who against
> the proud gods and commodores of this earth, ever stands forth his own
> inexorable self. Delight is to him whose strong arms yet support him,
> when the ship of this base treacherous world has gone down beneath
> him. Delight is to him, who gives no quarter in the truth, and kills,
> burns, and destroys all sin though he pluck it out from under the
> robes of Senators and Judges…”[^33]

Ishmael hears Father Mapple’s sermon before he has even made it to
Nantucket. For a woeful man, the words must sound as if they were meant
for him. He is searching for some way to leave his low spirits behind,
and the end of the service speaks to this. Delight is sweeter than woe
is bitter, Father Mapple says. But how to attain delight? “Delight is to
him whose strong arms yet support him, when the ship of the base
treacherous world has gone down beneath him”. The entire passage is an
odd statement for a Christian preacher, even aside from the part about
“gods”, plural. Ishmael might like to hear some sort of reaffirmation
that the world is good and joyful, but no: it’s a vulgar, villainous
land. Yet that villainy does not preclude delight—that is the curious
thing. Delight, in Father Mapple’s understanding, is not something that
is granted by a benevolent God in a loving land, it is a victory of
strength and perseverance in a sea of misery. Outlasting hardship as a
means for delight may sound Christian, but in Father Mapple’s
construction, the man who holds himself up does so by his strong arms,
not by the aid of God. The man is alone in his conquest of woe.

This last paragraph of the discourse reminds me of the fire and
brimstone preaching I heard once as a child, visiting my grandfather in
North Carolina. That sermon was filled with fiery adjectives and
exclamations, a reminder: *repent, or else!* Father Mapple’s speech is
constructed similarly, but with a diametrically opposite suggestion.
Instead of saying, *ye sinners will be killed, burned, and destroyed!*,
he grants delight to the man who, “kills, burns, and destroys all sin”.
He extols the man who is good[^34] and triumphant in a world of sin,
rather than admonishing the man who is sinful in a world of good. His
rhetoric brings a passionate and rebellious excitement to the thirst for
delight. Man must stand against proud gods. He must be brave and
steadfast, and if he is, he can live and die with delight.

Whaling offers the same challenge to Ishmael—the challenge to find
delight amidst toil and treachery. “The transition is a keen one, I
assure you, from the schoolmaster to a sailor, and requires a strong
decoction of Seneca and the Stoics to enable you to grin and bear
it”[^35]. Ishmael does not simply want to survive work on a whaleship,
he wants to find a way to enjoy it. There is a challenge in this that
entices him. Father Mapple mentions the strong-armed man, tasking
against the world, but the Ishmael of “Loomings” has nothing to task
against, and his apathy gives the impression of atrophy. Unlike
meandering around Manhattan, whaling provides the opportunity for him to
place himself in a position he must “grin and bear”. He has grown bored
on land, and there is a certain sport in surviving a whaling voyage with
a grin on his face. Grinning-and-bearing pits the smiling spirit of man
against the woe of the world; it makes a game out of saying, *this is
awful, watch me outlast it.* [^36]

It is important to draw a distinction between outlasting and conquering.
Powerful verbs are bountiful in Father Mapple’s speech. But the man he
describes—the man of delight—is not physically going anywhere. That man
is using all of his power of action to remain steadfast in one place.
One might normally associate Father Mapple’s rhetoric with a
revolutionary spirit, where a man has a clear goal in mind, and pursues
it despite the hardships he will endure. In the sermon, though, the only
goal is delight, and this is a result of standing strong and still and
being resolute of mind. Father Mapple’s man has no outward direction or
challenge. Instead of conquering some goal, he is outlasting woe. The
first time I read the sermon, I thought of an advertisement that shows
an athlete stumbling from exhaustion but getting up again. His words
engage a similarly passionate excitement of triumph over adversity—“…who
against the proud gods and commodores of this earth, ever stands forth
his own inexorable self”[^37]. In the advertisement though, the athlete
is trying to go out and get *something*; he is in pursuit of a career in
sports, or a record time. The sports advertisement philosophy suggests
that with enough willpower one can physically leave a place of hardship
for a life of delight. This is a subtle, but significant difference.
Father Mapple’s sermon celebrates a stoic strength of mind and spirit
that brings delight in a treacherous world. In his discourse, there is
nothing to attain physically—the world is treacherous in all directions.
Victory comes by means of disposition.

Whaling forces Ishmael to live like Father Mapple’s delighted man. He is
trapped by the ocean’s moat, so he cannot simply leave when his work
becomes trying. Practically, he is held in place by his specific
position in the ship’s hierarchy as well. He has to learn to find
delight without movement. In the first chase, Ishmael is already
beginning to look as though he were the man in the sermon. Caught amidst
the storm, lost, and only found after nearly being inadvertently
keel-hauled, he must quickly understand what a precarious endeavor he
has embarked upon. Aboard the *Pequod*, even Starbuck, the most
pragmatic of them all, cannot think in the base terms of safety and
sound business that would allow one to pass a whale up after deeming it
unworthy of the risk. Being so wedded to tradition, they are unable to
make a decision that would prioritize self-preservation. The cowardice
would be despicable. The only recourse, for Ishmael at least, is an
inward movement that allows him to “grin and bear it”, since any outward
movement towards safety is prohibited.

> Now then, thought I, unconsciously rolling up the sleeves of my frock,
> here goes for a cool, collected dive at death and destruction, and the
> devil fetch the hindmost. [^38]

Ishmael cannot choose where he dives—that decision is made for him. By
command of the fishery, by command of Ahab, the helm steers for death
and destruction. Ishmael can, however, choose how he gets there, at
least metaphysically. He gets to make that dive “cool” and “calm”,
rather than frenzied and furious; and in doing so, he wins a little
victory over the woe of the world; he gets to look all around him and
know that for all the world’s bleakness, for all its futility and
insolent darkness, it can’t take away his grin. The satisfaction of this
grin is significant. The crew of the oil-laden *Bachelor*, for example,
which has had such success it must sell off its food and coffee to make
room for barrels of sperm, may mark their muzzles with a wider smile,
but they smile the fool’s smile of gratification. Ishmael, on the other,
retains the delight of knowing that he has the vitality to find pleasure
in a treacherous sea.

This is a pleasure he could not have had meandering around Manhattan;
the only thing he had to bear there was his own “hypos”. When death and
destruction, in their most visceral sense, are distant and easily
navigated, he would never need a “strong decoction of Seneca and the
Stoics” to continue. With so much freedom to choose, and the ability to
resign at any time, such a person can simply change scenery. In doing
so, though, one arrives at the conclusion that it is more important
where one dives than how he dives. It may never even occur to him that
he can change how he dives—the Ishmael of the first paragraph of
“Loomings”, for one, doesn’t seem to consider that he can overcome his
hypos without the sea. Peleg brings this up when Ishmael first speaks
with him, while the boat is still at dock in Nantucket. Ishmael explains
that he wishes to see the world, and Peleg sends him to the bow—“Can't
ye see the world where you stand?”[^39]—there’s not a whole lot of world
to see aboard a whaler. Ishmael thinks he needs the water, but really
just needs the philosophy he must adopt at sea. Shortly thereafter,
Ishmael celebrates the general man of this new mindset.

> He bolts down all events, all creeds, and beliefs, and persuasions,
> all hard things visible and invisible, never mind how knobby; as an
> ostrich of potent digestion gobbles down bullets and gun flints.[^40]

This feeling, the bolting-down, never-mind-how-knobby feeling, is
enlivening. Even just to read it is inspiring. It allows one to take
pleasure in perseverance, to find freedom and power in mindfulness and
disposition when physical freedom or power is lacking. There is a
delight in facing something awful and telling yourself, *alright, let’s
do this*. Aboard the *Pequod*, Ishmael must take on this demeanor, which
wraps together the wisdom of woe and the desire to be light-hearted in a
disposition that is neither foolish nor unbearably sober, but instead a
mean of serious contentedness. Ishmael seems to have left Manhattan is
search of contentment, and finds it aboard the *Pequod* in the face of
wickedness.

Queequeg and Ishmael are quite similar in this regard. Queequeg leaves
his home island with the intention of learning the Christian secrets of
felicity, only to realize that Christians too, can, and often do, live a
lamentable life.

> For at bottom—so he told me—he was actuated by a profound desire to
> learn among the Christians, the arts whereby to make his people still
> happier than they were; and more than that, still better than they
> were. But, alas! the practices of whalemen soon convinced him that
> even Christians could be both miserable and wicked; infinitely more
> so, than all his father's heathens. Arrived at last in old Sag Harbor;
> and seeing what the sailors did there; and then going on to Nantucket,
> and seeing how they spent their wages in that place also, poor
> Queequeg gave it up for lost. Thought he, it's a wicked world in all
> meridians; I'll die a pagan.[^41]

Both Queequeg and Ishmael seek delight, and both find that no mere place
nor knowledge will provide it. Unlike Ishmael, though, Queequeg has his
animistic pagan idol, Yojo, to lead him through the wickedness of the
world. Queequeg is willing to accept Yojo’s authority, and relinquish
his personal agency to his faith.[^42] In the beginning of the book, for
example, Yojo demands that Ishmael must choose the whaleboat he and
Queequeg will ship on. And Queequeg submits. This is a significant
decision to place in another’s hands—especially someone who has no prior
experience in whaling. Queequeg, though, is insistent that Yojo’s word
be followed, and Ishmael does indeed choose the ship. By his own
admission, Ishmael is the last person that should be entrusted to choose
the ship. He picks one named after an “extinct” tribe, which looks
“quaint”, and is “a rare old craft”. For most people, these would all be
reasons to stand clear; he’s picking the vessel to which the next three
years of his life will be consigned, after all. But these traits appeal
to Ishmael, and he decides that the *Pequod* is the ship for them—a
decision that ultimately kills Queequeg. Yet Queequeg accepts Ishmael’s
choice, just as Yojo would have it. Queequeg has such faith in his god
that he quite literally relinquishes his life to serve Yojo’s command.
And Queequeg, throughout the book, seems happier for his submission to
his idol.

Ishmael, though he claims to be a Christian, never exhibits any real
religious reverence. Without faith, Ishmael on land lacks the pilot that
Queequeg finds in his god—and he of all people needs a pilot. This
changes on the *Pequod*, though. As a lowly sailor, he is no longer his
own pilot. Whaling serves as Ishmael’s religion. It gives him the
confinement he needs to navigate his life. It forces him to give over
some of his agency and acquiesce. In this process, he leaves behind his
misanthropic hypos, and begins to know delight. When he describes to the
reader that he ships as a deckhand, he mentions as if by unfortunate
consequence that he is a slave to the boat. But in truth, this sort of
temporary, moderated slavery serves the entire purpose.

It is a particular person that can simply decide one afternoon that’d
he’d like to go on a whaling voyage with the air of deciding he’d like
to treat himself to a pastry. There is something enviable about
this—what about his mortgage? What about his job? What about his family?
Few people have lives that could accommodate such a decision, and it
quickly becomes an elusive dream to cut the lines that hold one in place
and—as the travel brochures say—*escape!* One wants a rest from constant
schedule and obligation and envisions a holiday of unbounded
independence, the opportunity to have no plan and to do as one pleases.
Because this feeling is so widespread, it is tempting, as a reader, to
assume that Ishmael has the same desire. Really, though, Ishmael is
doing the opposite. He is not casting off the bowlines to run towards
freedom; he is fleeing freedom. It is the very life that allows him to
so suddenly leave that causes his hypos, and that he must get away from.
Instead of breaking from a constrained, narrow life for an adventure of
free will, he is in need of a vacation from his own, boundless agency.
The only freedom aboard a ship is the open-ocean, and that is fatal.
Just like his biblical namesake, Ishmael is an orphan—perhaps
metaphorically, perhaps literally—it makes little difference; but he
needs to find something to wed himself to. The whaling voyage is
something which can possess his errant heart. Clothed in the language
and spirit of exploration, Ishmael’s story shows how structure can help
man find an “eternal mildness of joy” within—“a mute calm”.

The thought that Ishmael finds delight through the bonds of the
*Pequod*, though, is little troubling. In my own experience commercial
fishing I’ve heard stories of young men who have walked the docks and
joined the wrong boat. They find themselves with a drunk captain on a
boat plagued with mechanical issues. In one instance, I met a man who
had finished a sleepless season and realized the captain had no plans to
pay him. Is it naïve to celebrate Ishmael’s confinement and difficulties
when these anecdotes sound so wretched? Perhaps Ishmael has had good
fortune in the ship he finds, and the characters of these other stories
have just been ill-fated. As strange as it is to think that Ishmael
might have been lucky in ending up on the *Pequod*—abstracted from the
story, it’s hard to imagine a more terrifying captain or unfortunate
experience—the ship does seems to be perfect for him. He is a man
without direction, and nothing to be interested in, and finds a captain
who is obsessed and whose compass is stubborn. Ishmael reveres the ardor
and instinct of seasoned whalemen, and his officers, if a little dull at
times, do not lack passion or experience. Of all the other boats we meet
in the book, none are quite right for him. The Town-Ho is riddled with
violence; the Jeroboam, by Gabriel and his mutinous faction; the Virgin,
by ignorance and poor luck; the Rosebud, again by ignorance; the
Delight, with defeat, stove boats and five men dead; and the Rachel,
without her child. The Samuel-Enderby and the Bachelor are the only
ships in high spirits, and they appear a little foolish. Things seem too
easy or carefree for them, and their laughter is unsatisfying.

When I think of my friends in Alaska, though, these last two boats are
the ones they would hope for. They, unlike Ishmael, have a stated reason
for fishing: money. Fishing becomes a layover, a springboard to
something greater. Ishmael, on the other hand, has no good reason to go
Nantucket, and maybe this is precisely what makes the voyage so
meaningful. He does not have an expectation of what the whale-fishery
will provide him with, or how it will serve him financially. This is
remarkable. It is hard to conceive that one could spend three years
workings at sea, and not ask himself at least once, *what will I do once
I’m back on land?* Yet Ishmael never does this. It never seems to bother
him that after the voyage, he’ll likely be back in Nantucket, again with
little or no money in his purse, and nothing particular to interest him
on shore.

Perhaps whaling prohibits having concern for life beyond the expedition.
After “The First-Lowering”, Ishmael promptly writes his will, and
discloses that the activity is a favorite diversion among sailors. He
speaks of it as a liberating act. Now that he has legally considered the
future, he is free to pay no heed to it for the rest of the voyage. And
with such odds of death, why should he think of what is to come?

Others, though, do have concern for what might be called the return on
investment of their whaling efforts. And often, the concern is
manifested as a fear that there is no return—that there is nothing to be
gained by all their toil. Even Ahab is not immune to this overwhelming
thought, and questions in the end how he has profited by a life spent
whaling. “Where lies the final harbor, whence we unmoor no more?”[^43]
he asks. We sail and sail, but when will we be satisfied with rest? The
cook, Fleece, notices the same life of perpetual hunger in the sharks.
“…no use a-preaching to such dam g'uttons as you call 'em, till dare
bellies is full, and dare bellies is bottomless…” Men are akin to the
sharks, gorging and goring themselves until their bellies are full, and
their bellies are bottomless. There is no end to toil; man can never be
satisfied with the food he has eaten or the port he has arrived at. Man
will struggle for the pleasure of rest, but will never find it—it does
not exist. The peaceful port of contentment seems to be moving
perpetually down the coastline, just ahead of man’s prow. *All of life
is vain*, this thought says.

Aboard the *Pequod*, though, Ishmael is never disheartened by this
understanding. To carry the analogy of the sharks perhaps a little too
far, he finds a way to enjoy eating without thoughts of satiety. Or to
use Ahab’s metaphor, he sails without wishing for a harbor. Ishmael
learns to accept that “there is nothing better for a man than that he
should eat and drink, and find enjoyment in his toil”[^44].

## The Try-Works

There is one time, in “The Try-Works”, when Ishmael discloses the
anxiety that life is meaningless. “‘All is Vanity’. <span
style="font-variant:small-caps;">All</span>,”[^45] he quotes and
emphasizes. It is easy to imagine the Ishmael of “Loomings” uttering
these words in cynical despair. And it easy to see how, aboard the
*Pequod*, that sentiment would be felt even more acutely. He is a
laborer in a deadly industry, forsaking land and domestic comfort, and
for what? “All is vanity”. When he has time to reflect, he sees the
absurdity of the whole endeavor of whaling and what it speaks of society
as a whole. Here is Ishmael as their boat closes in on an exhausted
whale: “But pity there was none. For all his old age, and his one arm,
and his blind eyes, he must die the death and be murdered, in order to
light the gay bridals and other merry-makings of men, and also to
illuminate the solemn churches that preach unconditional inoffensiveness
by all to all"[^46]. Ishmael sees the origin of artificial light and
what goes into illuminating a church. He glimpses the hypocrisy of a
culture that is detached from what it uses. Another remark shows a
similar feeling: "For God's sake, be economical with your lamps and
candles! not a gallon you burn, but at least one drop of man's blood was
spilled for it"[^47]. What terrible senselessness there must be in a
world where one kills for an evening light! And what contempt he must
feel for the people who light those lamps without a hint of danger! How
could the life of a man ever be outbid by the value of whale oil? Though
he hides the sentiment in a cerement of humor, it must feel maddeningly
meaningless. Facing these questions and infuriating insights, again,
Ishmael must ask himself again, *Why am I whaling? What’s the point of
all this? *

But as quickly as the despair developed, the chapter comes to a close,
and the next one, “The Lamp” suddenly begins. “The Lamp” is a half-page,
three-paragraph celebration of the light of the whale ship. The woe and
vanity Ishmael is so disturbingly aware of in the “The Try-Works”
swiftly vanishes. Here, he sees the sailors as chivalric heroes who hunt
for the freshest and most genuine oil. The quest sounds as if it were a
religious one—they scour the seas to illuminate their berth with the
best of worldly light. Ishmael faces a realization that “all is vanity”
but is unperturbed by it. After so loudly affirming that life is empty
we might expect him to be consumed by crisis, but he is not. Something
about his disposition, or his situation aboard the *Pequod*, allows him
to quickly move on.

At first thought, the idea that “all is vanity” seems a reason to walk
the plank to a watery end. But there is another way to understand
emptiness such that it is constructive, and Ishmael arrives at that
understanding aboard the *Pequod*. Because life is futile, there’s no
reason for him to be concerned with his direction. It makes no
difference whether the prow points east or west; it is an empty world in
all meridians. And this is not a dark thought; it is liberating. It
means that Ishmael does not have to worry about outcomes—they’re all the
same in their futility. This is what lets Ishmael make such a seemingly
rash decision to venture to Nantucket, and ship on the *Pequod*. Others
would be concerned with the profitability and risk of such an
enterprise, financial and otherwise, but not Ishmael. And this thought
is what keeps Ishmael from despairing when he begins to reflect on the
value of the whale fishery. It allows him to broach with a joking air
the fatal hypocrisy of the people who write pamphlets preaching pacifism
by the light of an oil lamp. There is no such thing as profit in life,
and he is all the more free to delight for it. As the cliché goes, he
has nothing to lose and nothing to gain.

In recognizing and accepting that life is meaningless, he is set far
apart from the man who is ostensibly the subject of the book, his
monomaniac captain, Ahab. Ahab will not allow that the attack of
Moby-Dick that severed his leg was accidental, and he assigns his life a
specific purpose; Ishmael relinquishes any ultimate direction, and
allows himself to drift calmly in any direction. The author of
Ecclesiastes notices with disdain that to live is to strive after the
wind. Ahab, though, has no qualms about striving after the wind.

> *“And yet, 'tis a noble and heroic thing, the wind! who ever conquered
> it? In every fight it has the last and bitterest blow. Run tilting at
> it, and you but run through it. Ha! a coward wind that strikes stark
> naked men, but will not stand to receive a single blow. Even Ahab is a
> braver thing—a nobler thing than that.”*[^48]

Instead of lamenting that man is a creature that strives after the wind,
Ahab admonishes the wind for not letting itself be striven after. There
is nothing wrong with man, just in the cowardly wind’s tendency to back
away from a fair fight—he will not accept that pursuit itself is
meaningless. Ahab shows a similar obstinacy throughout his quest for
Moby-Dick. Come what may, despite all forebodings, he will engage the
white whale again. Of course, for the reader, it is easy to see the
folly in his undertaking, and the devastating consequences of his
obstinacy. He is after all, the “wilful murderer of thirty men and
more”[^49]. And unlike Ishmael, he lives and dies without delight. But
Ishmael is the first to suggest that Ahab is a man to be revered.

> *There is a wisdom that is woe; but there is a woe that is madness.
> And there is a Catskill eagle in some souls that can alike dive down
> into the blackest gorges, and soar out of them again and become
> invisible in the sunny spaces. And even if he for ever flies within
> the gorge, that gorge is in the mountains; so that even in his lowest
> swoop the mountain eagle is still higher than other birds upon the
> plain, even though they soar.*[^50]

Ishmael has a wisdom that is woe, but Ahab has a woe that is madness.
Yet in this madness, Ahab is a Catskill eagle. He is of a soul that is
so magnificent, that even in his lowest flight he soars higher than all
others. If it is unclear that Ishmael refers to Ahab in this metaphor,
we only need one more quotation to demonstrate it. Later, Ishmael
observes the exhausted Ahab after he has lost the first day’s battle to
Moby-Dick, and offers a similar comment.

> In an instant's compass, great hearts sometimes condense to one deep
> pang, the sum total of those shallow pains kindly diffused through
> feebler men's whole lives. And so, such hearts, though summary in each
> one suffering; still, if the gods decree it, in their life-time
> aggregate a whole age of woe, wholly made up of instantaneous
> intensities; for even in their pointless centres, those noble natures
> contain the entire circumferences of inferior souls.[^51]

The two quotations have a similar construction: “even if he for ever
flies within the gorge” and “even in their pointless centres”; and they
amount to the same comment. There are certain men—great hearts—that are
so superior, that even at their lowest point, or by their smallest
measure, surpass all others at their best. The second quotation is
explicitly about Ahab[^52], and shows that Ishmael, while of a contrary
philosophy, still recognizes a noble nature in his captain.

Ahab captures a sort of American spirit in his monomania[^53]. He has a
triumphant goal to kill the leviathan himself, the most lofty and most
Sisyphean of all, and loses everything as he relentlessly marches
towards it—wisdom and delight be damned. It does not seem to matter much
how Ahab’s goal arises, but that it exists at all. It gives him a medium
for the valiant spirit of the man who is always striving. Ahab has
something to struggle after, a purpose to give himself over to and be
annihilated by. And for this, even in timid Ishmael’s eyes, he is noble.

Ishmael leaves Manhattan searching for a calm contentment aboard a
Nantucket whaler. And he finds it. But to do so, he must accept the
vanity of life, and release attachment to any greater τέλος. In
disassociating himself from the postulate that life is meaningful, he is
precluded from the noble and storied life of Ahab. There is little to
captivate in an “eternal mildness of joy”. In return for delight, he
resigns himself to the uncelebrated life; he resigns himself to the
position of narrator.

I think of Ishmael, and a part of me wants to assert in sweeping strokes
that Melville is showing us that belonging is good, that tethers are
good, and that we are wrong to forsake them for our own agency. While I
don’t want to be Ishmael, he reminds me that there is much to be said
for the quiet life that never finds its place in Nantucket yarns, but
was delightful while it lasted. But even Ishmael questions his life of
wisdom and delight in the face of Ahab’s life of madness and nobility.
As a reader, I too am torn between Ishmael’s “mute calm” and the sheer
impressiveness of Ahab. Because mild joy does not make for a renowned
life, there is a schism one must navigate between the celebrated life
and the satisfying life. The two options do not seem to overlap in
*Moby-Dick.* And Melville gives little to guide us in this decision. He
manages to make opposing characters appealing in completely opposite
ways. One moment Ahab seems a paragon of vitality, and at another a
discontent fool who has lost control of himself and kills real, human
lives. One moment whaling seems a heroic and noble endeavor, and at
another an empty venture to provide luxury at an atrocious expense. One
moment Ishmael seems stoic and quietly impressive, and in the next a
callous scoundrel. *Moby-Dick* is full of contradictions, or at least
full of passages that inspire contradictory feelings, and Melville is
content to let the contradictions lie as they are. He doesn't give us
strict symbols.

Perhaps this isn’t stylistic though, and merely the result of austere
observation—there are no strict symbols in the novel because there are
no strict symbols in life. And more to the point, one cannot have it
all, all the time. The reader is left to choose. Achilles was presented
two options for his life: an early death and undying glory, or old years
and no glory. We, too, are presented two paths in life by *Moby-Dick*:
quiet contentment and life, or emblazoned rebellion and death. Melville
will not make this decision for us. Reading it, I’m not sure he’s made
it for himself.

What Melville does show us, though, is that it is wrong for us not to
seek tethers of some sort. As much as we may romanticize the
free-roaming life, that is the misguided and lamentable life of the
stray, that is the heartless life of *nothing-particular-to-interest*,
that is the life of the man with nothing at stake. And that is what is
tragic about *Moby-Dick*; at the end, once again, Ishmael is an orphan.

[^1]: Chapter 1, pg. 3. All page numbers refer to the Penguin Classics
    Deluxe Edition,

    *Melville, Herman. Moby-Dick, Or, The Whale. London: Penguin, 2009.
    Print.*

[^2]: Chapter 1, pg. 6

[^3]: Deckhands had the option of buying items such as tobacco from the
    ship’s store and would sometimes take an advance while in a port of
    call to replace clothing or boots. Thus, even on a profitable trip,
    a sailor might come home with debt. On one voyage of the Whaleship
    *Milton*, for example, which fished out of New Bedford from 1832 to
    1885, the lowest-earning deckhand was paid \$10.10.

[^4]: Chapter 1, pg. 4

[^5]: Chapter 24, “The Advocate”, for example.

[^6]: Chapter 62, “The Dart”, for example

[^7]: Chapter 1, pg. 7

[^8]: He gives us an example of how Providence’s playbill might look:
    *“Grand Contested Election for Presidency of the United States.*
    <span style="font-variant:small-caps;">whaling voyage by one
    ishmael.</span> Bloody Battle in Afghanistan.”

[^9]: Chapter 1, pg. 4

[^10]: Chapter 1, pg. 4

[^11]: Ibid., pg. 7

[^12]: Plutarch’s *Symposiacs*, Book VIII, Question 8

[^13]: “Extracts”, xxxi

[^14]: In “The Affidavit”, for example, he offers an account in which he
    sees the same whale twice, at least three years apart. The man
    throwing the harpoon is said to have left the boat while it was
    moored in Africa, which the Pequod never does.

[^15]: Chapter 48, pg. 245

[^16]: Chapter 1, pg. 3

[^17]: Chapter 49, pg. 248

[^18]: Chapter 49, Pg. 247

[^19]: The distance to calculate how far one can see before the
    curvature of the earth interferes is given by the Pythagorean
    theorem, $s^{2} = {(r + h)}^{2} - r^{2}$, where $s$ is the distance
    one can see, $r$ is the radius of the earth, and $h$ is the viewer’s
    height above sea level. At 50 feet above sea level, which seems like
    a conservative estimate for the lookout position, one would be able
    to see 8.37 miles. This means that for most of the journey through
    the strait, at least one shore would be visible, and at times, both.

[^20]: Chapter 87, pg. 421

[^21]: Chapter 87, pg. 421

[^22]: Ibid., pg. 422

[^23]: In the commotion of the chase, it is easy to forget what happens
    to the whale originally fixed by Queequeg's harpoon. This darted
    whale which so fervently towed them shook the harpoon loose at just
    the right moment, to send the skiff, skidding as it were, between
    two whales and into the calm. Not only does the whale take them
    where they need to go—it drops them off. The whale seems like a
    parent pulling in front of a school and giving her
    somewhat-unwilling child a small nudge out the car door—perhaps with
    a reminder of "mother knows best!" as she goes.

[^24]: Granted, most people would prefer to never have that “something
    else” they are tethered to be the Leviathan. For someone like
    Ishmael, though, even a tie to the whale is advantageous. This will
    be revisited later in the paper.

[^25]: Chapter 87, pg. 424

[^26]: Chapter 87, pg. 424

[^27]: Another example of this is the car. A modern car lets one go
    wherever he wishes, whenever he wishes, with almost no exception. He
    relies, though, on the car operating as intended, and when it has
    problems, it is unlikely he will be able to fix them. The very
    desire to make the car function so smoothly, and to never impede the
    operator’s desire, is what has made it so specialized that the man
    must be tied to a mechanic who can rescue him when the time comes.
    Of course, someone who is uncomfortable relying on a mechanic could
    proudly announce that he will use his feet as his only means of
    transportation, but then this man will find it difficult to go
    wherever he wishes, whenever he wishes, which was the original
    intention of the car. He will not be tethered to a mechanic, but
    will be bound by the weather and by the time he has for travel. The
    point is, one can never be a free agent and still maintain complete
    freedom of agency.

[^28]: Chapter 87, pg. 422

[^29]: Chapter 91, pg. 440

[^30]: Ibid.

[^31]: Chapter 87, pg. 425

[^32]: Ibid

[^33]: Chapter 9, pg. 54

[^34]: It is worth acknowledging that Father Mapple’s conception of good
    seems quite different from the traditional Christian conception of
    good, but nonetheless, he conceives of his own “good man”.

[^35]: Chapter 1, pg. 6

[^36]: The sport of grin-and-bear seems like a physical counterpart to
    his narrative game of making a grisly idea a humorous one. In both,
    he must face some wicked but remain unscathed. He notices the
    world’s woe, and turns it into a joke; or he faces the leviathan
    himself, and laughs at man’s death.

[^37]: Chapter 9, pg. 54

[^38]: Chapter 49, pg. 249

[^39]: Chapter 16, pg. 81

[^40]: Chapter 49, pg. 247

[^41]: Chapter 12, pg. 62

[^42]: My readers who are less inclined to animism may protest that
    Queequeg is making this all up, since Yojo is an inanimate idol, and
    that he should not be credited for having faith; but nonetheless,
    the willingness of Queequeg to submit his will to others remains.

[^43]: Chapter 114, pg. 535

[^44]: Eccles 2:24

[^45]: Chapter 96, pg. 465

[^46]: Chapter 81, pg. 391

[^47]: Chapter 45, pg. 224

[^48]: Chapter 135, pg. 614

[^49]: Chapter 106, pg. 507.

[^50]: Chapter 123, pg. 559

[^51]: Chapter 133, pg. 600

[^52]: For sake of brevity I have left the preceding sentences, which
    demonstrate this, out of the block quote. Ishmael is commenting on
    Ahab’s “physical prostration”, and uses the metaphor of circles to
    explain the abbreviated intensity of the captain’s despair.

[^53]: For a glimpse of just how American this is, look no further than
    Theodore Roosevelt’s “Citizen in a Republic” speech: “It is not the
    critic who counts; not the man who points out how the strong man
    stumbles, or where the doer of deeds could have done them better.
    The credit belongs to the man who is actually in the arena, whose
    face is marred by dust and sweat and blood; who strives valiantly;
    who errs, who comes short again and again, because there is no
    effort without error and shortcoming; but who does actually strive
    to do the deeds; who knows great enthusiasms, the great devotions;
    who spends himself in a worthy cause; who at the best knows in the
    end the triumph of high achievement, and who at the worst, if he
    fails, at least fails while daring greatly, so that his place shall
    never be with those cold and timid souls who neither know victory
    nor defeat.”
